---
layout: project-v2
title: Lima Videogame Lab
subtitle: Researching the social and cultural impact of video games in Peru
shortname: lvl
type: project
date: May 2009
location: Lima, Peru
permalink: projects/lvl/
featured-image: /files/videojuegos-peru.jpg
---
The Lima Videogame Lab is a Peruvian project dedicated to the study and research of video games, game culture and the game industry in Peru and Latin America. Its purpose is to provide educators, journalists, researchers, parents, creators, critics, and especially gamers with the resources and the information to better frame and understand the development of game culture in Peru.

The Lab brings together practitioners, researchers, and enthusiasts from different backgrounds and skills to explore the experience of games from various conceptual perspectives. Since 2009, we've worked on various initiatives, analysing specific video games or the evolution of the game industry and its potential in our context. As the game industry grows in economic and cultural relevance, understanding the medium becomes so much more important to identify the ways in which it is affecting our social behaviours and configuring our shared references and vocabulary.

Our concern stems from observing how games are frequently misrepresented and mischaracterised in public discourse, across media and in academic research. In our view, this happens primarily because most of what's said and written about games comes from people who have not actively played them or are not part of their ecosystem. Because of that, the Lab seeks to "speak from within", talking about games having played them and comparing the experience of the medium with the experiences of other media and technologies. This approach allows us to evaluate problems such as that of violence in games, the cognitive impact of play, the economic benefits of the local industry, the social relations between player communities, amongst others, and to contribute a better informed, less sensational discourse to describe and explain these phenomena.